.TH PEAK-MEM 1 "January 2025" "peak-mem 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
peak-mem \- monitor peak memory usage of processes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B peak-mem
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.B \-\-
\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B peak-mem
is a lightweight memory usage monitor that tracks and reports the peak memory
usage of a process and its children during execution. It provides both
real-time monitoring and post-execution reporting with minimal overhead.
.PP
The tool monitors both RSS (Resident Set Size) and VSZ (Virtual Size) memory
metrics, tracking the maximum values reached during the lifetime of the
monitored process.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Output Format Options
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Output results in JSON format. Useful for parsing by other tools.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-csv
Output results in CSV format. The output includes headers and is suitable
for importing into spreadsheets or data analysis tools.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Quiet mode. Only output the peak RSS value in bytes with no formatting.
Useful for scripting.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show detailed breakdown including process tree. Displays memory usage for
each process in the hierarchy.
.SS Monitoring Options
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-watch
Display real-time memory usage during execution. Updates the display
continuously as the process runs.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-threshold " " \fISIZE\fR
Set a memory threshold alert. Accepts values like 512M, 1G, 2GB.
The program will indicate if the threshold is exceeded.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-children
Don't track child processes. By default, peak-mem monitors the entire
process tree.
.TP
.BR \-\-timeline " " \fIFILE\fR
Record detailed memory timeline to the specified file. The timeline
includes timestamps and memory values for later analysis.
.TP
.BR \-\-interval " " \fIMS\fR
Set the sampling interval in milliseconds (default: 100). Lower values
provide more accurate peak detection but increase overhead.
.TP
.BR \-\-units " " \fIUNIT\fR
Force specific memory units in human-readable output instead of automatic
sizing. Supported units: B (bytes), KB (kilobytes), MB (megabytes),
GB (gigabytes), KiB (kibibytes), MiB (mebibytes), GiB (gibibytes).
This option affects all human-readable output including verbose mode
and baseline comparisons.
.SS Baseline Management Options
.TP
.BR \-\-save\-baseline " " \fINAME\fR
Save the current run's memory usage as a baseline with the given name.
Baselines are stored for future comparison to detect memory regressions.
.TP
.BR \-\-compare\-baseline " " \fINAME\fR
Compare the current run against a previously saved baseline. Reports
memory usage changes and indicates if a regression is detected.
.TP
.BR \-\-regression\-threshold " " \fIPERCENT\fR
Set the percentage increase in RSS that constitutes a regression
(default: 10.0). Only used with \-\-compare\-baseline.
.TP
.BR \-\-baseline\-dir " " \fIDIR\fR
Directory to store baseline files (default: ~/.cache/peak-mem/baselines).
.TP
.B \-\-list\-baselines
List all saved baselines and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-delete\-baseline " " \fINAME\fR
Delete a saved baseline and exit.
.SS Standard Options
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Usage
Monitor memory usage of a cargo build:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem -- cargo build
.RE
.SS JSON Output
Get machine-readable output:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --json -- ./myapp
.RE
.SS Memory Threshold
Alert if memory usage exceeds 1GB:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --threshold 1G -- ./memory-intensive-app
.RE
.SS Real-time Monitoring
Watch memory usage as it happens:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --watch -- ./long-running-process
.RE
.SS Timeline Recording
Record detailed timeline for analysis:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --timeline memory.json -- ./app
.RE
.SS Process-only Monitoring
Monitor only the main process, ignoring children:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --no-children -- ./parent-process
.RE
.SS Fixed Memory Units
Display memory usage in megabytes:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --units MB -- ./myapp
.RE
.SS Combined Options
Verbose output with threshold and timeline:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem -v --threshold 2G --timeline mem.json -- make -j8
.RE
.SS Memory Regression Detection
Save a baseline for your application:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --save-baseline v1.0 -- ./myapp
.RE
.PP
Compare against the baseline after changes:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --compare-baseline v1.0 -- ./myapp
.RE
.PP
Use stricter regression threshold (5%):
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --compare-baseline v1.0 --regression-threshold 5 -- ./myapp
.RE
.PP
List and manage baselines:
.PP
.RS
.B peak-mem --list-baselines
.br
.B peak-mem --delete-baseline v1.0
.RE
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.SS Human-readable (default)
Shows peak RSS and VSZ in human-readable units (KB, MB, GB) along with
the monitored command and exit status.
.SS JSON Format (-j)
Outputs a JSON object containing:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
command: The executed command with arguments
.IP \(bu 2
peak_rss_bytes: Peak RSS in bytes
.IP \(bu 2
peak_vsz_bytes: Peak VSZ in bytes
.IP \(bu 2
duration_ms: Execution time in milliseconds
.IP \(bu 2
exit_code: Process exit code
.IP \(bu 2
threshold_exceeded: Boolean (if threshold was set)
.IP \(bu 2
tracked_children: Boolean indicating if children were tracked
.RE
.SS CSV Format (-c)
Outputs CSV with headers:
.RS
command,peak_rss_bytes,peak_vsz_bytes,duration_ms,exit_code
.RE
.SS Quiet Format (-q)
Outputs only the peak RSS value in bytes as a plain number.
.SS Verbose Format (-v)
Shows detailed process tree with individual memory usage for each process,
including PIDs and process names.
.SH MEMORY UNITS
Memory sizes can be specified using the following units:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
K, KB: Kilobytes (1024 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
M, MB: Megabytes (1024² bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
G, GB: Gigabytes (1024³ bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
No suffix: bytes
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B peak-mem
normally exits with the same status code as the monitored command. 
If the monitored command is terminated by a signal, peak-mem exits 
with status 128 + signal number.
.PP
Special exit codes:
.RS
.IP "1" 8
Memory threshold exceeded (when using --threshold)
.IP "1" 8
Memory regression detected (when using --compare-baseline)
.RE
.SH PLATFORM SUPPORT
.IP "Linux" 12
Full support via /proc filesystem
.IP "macOS" 12
Full support via proc_pidinfo
.IP "FreeBSD" 12
Not currently implemented
.IP "Windows" 12
Not currently implemented
.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Memory sampling occurs at intervals (default 100ms), so very brief spikes
might be missed. Decrease the interval for more accurate peak detection.
.IP \(bu 2
On some systems, tracking child processes requires appropriate permissions.
.IP \(bu 2
Timeline files can grow large for long-running processes with small intervals.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B peak-mem
forwards all environment variables to the monitored process without modification.
.SH SIGNALS
.B peak-mem
forwards most signals to the monitored process, allowing for proper cleanup
and termination handling.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/status
On Linux, used to read memory information.
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/task/
On Linux, used to track all threads of a process.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR time (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR htop (1),
.BR pmap (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: ~charmitro/peak-mem-devel@lists.sr.ht
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the peak-mem contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 peak-mem contributors. License: MIT
